Hanan ashrawi joins us from the AL jazer
Bureau in rala Hanan thank you so much
for joining us on upfront thank you Mark
it's good to be with you Israel's
assault on Gaza continues to cause Mass
Devastation and a mounting uh
humanitarian crisis uh in fact the world
food program's deputy director said that
nine out of 10 people in Gaza are not
eating every day and half half are
starving but last week the United States
stood alone and vetoed a un Security
Council resolution that called for a
humanitarian ceasefire despite
overwhelming support for it by other
countries the US Deputy ambassador to
the United Nations told the council that
the veto was against a quote imbalanced
resolution that was divorced from
reality also saying that it would not
move quote the needle forward on the
ground in any concrete way what is your
re reaction to that well I don't know
whether I can take that seriously or not
it's act actually it's Preposterous you
can't imagine that a grown intelligent
human being can say these things with a
straight face if anybody is divorced
from reality it's the US Administration
it is Biden and blinken and there
spokespeople who are parting such Hollow
meaningless ridiculous terms that are
exposing their own loss of contact with
reality if you cannot see the tens of
thousands of people killed under the
rubble or uh uh wounded or starving or
suffering from horrific diseases or
children who have all sorts of digestive
problems because they're drinking sea
water or contaminated water uh or people
who are going not knowing where they are
not knowing where their families are
it's incredible the the dimensions the
proportions of the horror that is
unfolding before our eyes are
unconscionable are unfathomable I can
tell you we cannot even you know uh
think of of all these things at once and
yet you have these people sitting there
nicely talking about giving Israel more
time voting against a ceasefire For
Heaven's Sake a
ceasefire stop killing innocent
civilians stop killing men women and
children stop obliterating whole
families stop destroying everything that
can sustain and maintain life whether
it's their homes neighborhoods
infrastructure water bakeries hospitals
schools universities everything is being
destroyed systematically and with Glee
and you sit back and you talk about this
being divorced from reality what
happened to I mean really there is
something quite astounding in the way
they lost touch with reality absolutely
and they lost touch with any sense of
decency or morality how how isolated is
the United States at this point uh in
this position I asked that because this
week uh the UN General Assembly voted on
a resolution calling for full and
immediate ceasefire it passed with 153
votes has the International Community
changed its its disposition toward this
yes yes clearly there are no two ways
about it the uh World public opinion is
Shifting um countries in the world
States even those who at the beginning
you know jumped with the American uh
instant position of maligning the
Palestinians and declaring that we're
Liars or we're terrorists or whatever uh
now they are beginning to see reality as
it is and at least some of them are
motivated by a sense of humanity and
decency by saying No this has to stop
now the US refused the C far
consistently it's not the first time it
uses the veto they call called for what
they said temporary pauses to bring in
some food Aid some Aid and then to
resume this is absolutely ridiculous and
this is inhuman you're of course in the
West Bank you're in ramala right now
again from the Ala uh Bureau uh and
detentions have been a consistent issue
in the West Bank uh however Human Rights
Watch noted a substantial increase in
the number of Palestinians who have been
arrested by Israeli authorities since
October 7th more than 3,000 people
including minors have been arrested or
placed under administrative detention
since then uh which brings the total
number of Palestinians imprisoned to
more than
7,000 uh in your view uh what is the
reason behind this
increase well actually since this year
since the uh uh this uh extremist racist
right-wing Coalition in Israel took over
they have been escalating not just in in
uh land theft not just in house
demolitions and so on but in raids in in
uh villages and towns in carrying out a
full ethnic cleansing in the West Bank
and as you rightfully said there are
hundreds uh now thousands of course of
Palestinians who have been detained
under the colonial uh administrative
detention system in which people are
detained without evidence without trial
without a hearing without charges
without any kind of Defense so it is a a
way of exercising control it's a way of
again uh getting more and more cards in
this game that they're playing in order
to say well look we've exchanged one for
one or whatever they have now close to
8,000 prisoners in in or or detes in
Israeli jails and they want to use them
for exchange well they could have
prevented uh this escalation and this
hard that we're going by agreeing a full
exchange of prisoners hostages or detes
by saying okay this statement all for
all release our captives we will release
your captives what I'm thinking about
the consequences of these conditions uh
in light of any vision of future
negotiations you're talking about
thousands of people imprisoned you're
talking about 18,000 people dead
according to gaza's health Ministry
since uh October 7th as you mentioned
lots of stuff happened before October
7th that we also have to take seriously
in light of hunger in light of
incarceration in light of mass death in
light of all of this stuff uh how do you
think about future negotiations with
Israel what's the calculus moving
forward now what's possible I think
talking about negotiations is really not
only unrealistic it is really an insult
to the suffering and pain of people from
the beginning we kept kept talking about
you know not being able to have
negotiations in a situation of asymmetry
that is a total lack of balance and
occupied people cannot negotiate with
their occupiers we kept telling people
that because the occupying power has uh
influence and has power over the
occupied who have no rights whatsoever
so you cannot ask uh people under
occupation to ask that occupier for
permission to be free not only don't
they want us to be free as a settler
Colonial system they want to take our
land without the people and they want to
maintain the system of of control and
willful infliction of pain and now
Netanyahu and his government they say
this openly there can be no
negotiations there can be no Palestinian
State no sovereignty we do not accept
any of these Palestinian leaders whether
they're Hamas or fat or anybody else now
they're saying something very serious
they're talking about the Palestinian
police and security as being also the
enemy so they're preparing the grounds
for an escalation in the West Bank and
of course they have totally destroyed
Gaza so who's going to negotiate what
with whom I think it's the
responsibility of the International
Community to end the Carnage to end the
siege of Gaza and the West Bank to end
the occupation and then you can talk
about peace based on international law
and the recognition of Palestinian
rights
as equal people who deserve their rights
their freedom their dignity their right
to self-determination and not as second
or third class citizens in an apartheid
state that is trying to superimpose
greater Israel on all of historical
Palestine it's not going to work and to
talk about peace negotiations is just
absurd at this present moment you talk
about the world Community watching all
of this happen uh over the last few
years uh it's been shown that youth
opinion particularly in the west has
shifted toward a more sympathetic view
of Palestine even former Israeli Prime
Minister ahud Barak expressed concern
over this change he told Politico uh
quote listen to the public tone we are
losing public opinion in Europe are you
seeing that shift and does that give you
any hope for a different kind of future
and a different kind of political
reality absolutely because for decades
for years Israel had the full sway the
full power to shape public discourse it
had its own uh uh propaganda machines it
has its own influence uh especially in
mainstream media um and and the Israeli
narrative and the Israeli version was
constantly the dominant one and the
Palestinians were either invisible or
silenced or maligned and and labeled uh
and so on gradually now with of course
with social media and with access to
information and knowledge and with the
ability to network and understand and
with the South also speaking out because
the global South now is becoming more
vocal the sort of dominant white
European Christian mentality is no
longer the the uh ruler of the world so
to speak and now throughout the West the
people are rising the people are are
understanding the nature of of the
Palestinian cause the fact that we are
an indigenous people being erased so to
speak and denied and oppressed by a
colonial power because to us Israel is a
Col is an offshoot of
colonialism uh and uh they are beginning
to speak out and they've refused to
listen to their own governments they've
challenged their own governments as you
saw in London and Paris and different
places the younger Generations are
questioning are asking are see seeking
facts and knowledge and are reaching out
and this is what gives them power that
they are not easily
intimidated and they are seeking uh
their own voice and they're seeking
Partnerships and networks and that's
what makes a difference now Dr Hanan
ashra thank you so much for joining us
and up front thank you Mark it's good to
be with
[Music]
you